--- PAGE 1 ---
BLOSSOMS
English Textbook for Class VII
West Bengal Board of Secondary Education
77/2, Park Street, Kolkata - 700016

--- PAGE 2 ---
According to New Syllabus
First Edition: October, 2012
Second Edition: June, 2013
Third Edition: December, 2014
West Bengal Board of Secondary Education

COPYRIGHT
WEST BENGAL BOARD OF SECONDARY EDUCATION
Copyright of this book and every part of it, including the arrangement, charts etc., is exclusively reserved for the West Bengal Board of Secondary Education. No part of the book can be printed or published and no explanatory notes or sample answer can be prepared without the express written permission of the West Bengal Board of Secondary Education. Any infringement of copyright, or preparation of notes, or sample answer in any manner will be severely dealt with and make such publishers liable to damages.

By order of the Administrator
Published by
Prof. Nabanita Chatterjee
Secretary
West Bengal Board of Secondary Education
77/2, Park Street, Kolkata - 700 016

Printed at
West Bengal Text Book Corporation Limited
(Government of West Bengal Enterprise)
Kolkata-700 056

--- PAGE 3 ---
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA PREAMBLE
WE, THE PEOPLE OF INDIA, having solemnly resolved to constitute India into a SOVEREIGN SOCIALIST SECULAR DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC and to secure to all its citizens: JUSTICE, social, economic and political;
LIBERTY of thought, expression, belief, faith and worship; EQUALITY of status and of opportunity and to promote among them all - FRATERNITY assuring the dignity of the individual and the unity and integrity of the Nation;
IN OUR CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY this twenty-sixth day of November 1949, do HEREBY ADOPT, ENACT AND GIVE TO OURSELVES THIS CONSTITUTION.

ভারতের সংবিধান প্রস্তাবনা
আমরা, ভারতের জনগণ, ভারতকে একটি সার্বভৌম সমাজতান্ত্রিক ধর্মনিরপেক্ষ গণতান্ত্রিক সাধারণতন্ত্র রূপে গড়ে তুলতে সত্যনিষ্ঠার সঙ্গে শপথ গ্রহণ করছি এবং তার সকল নাগরিক যাতে সামাজিক, অর্থনৈতিক ও রাজনৈতিক ন্যায়বিচার; চিন্তা, মতপ্রকাশ, বিশ্বাস, ধর্ম এবং উপাসনার স্বাধীনতা; সামাজিক প্রতিষ্ঠা অর্জন ও সুযোগের সমতা প্রতিষ্ঠা করতে পারে এবং তাদের সকলের মধ্যে ব্যক্তি-সম্ভ্রম ও জাতীয় ঐক্য এবং সংহতি সুনিশ্চিত করে সৌভ্রাতৃত্ব গড়ে তুলতে; আমাদের গণপরিষদে, আজ, ১৯৪৯ সালের ২৬ নভেম্বর, এতদ্বারা এই সংবিধান গ্রহণ করছি, বিধিবদ্ধ করছি এবং নিজেদের অর্পণ করছি।

--- PAGE 5 ---
PREFACE
Secondary Education is meant for the students who have entered the arena of education from the Primary level. In this arena the utmost need is to help the young buds to flower, to extend their knowledge and to explore their aptitudes, potentials towards different streams of learning for their further education. Keeping this concept in mind the new series of English textbooks for Secondary education is thus named "BLOSSOMS". 

This series of textbooks is based on the new curriculum and syllabus framed and recommended by the newly formed "Expert Committee" comprising of eminent academicians. The books are in the line with the vision of NCF 2005 and RTE Act 2009. This series of textbooks for Upper Primary Level (Class VI to VIII) is meant for the learners of English is a second language.

The pieces selected in the series are aimed to expose the learners to the thoughts and writings of the world's best writers and thinkers. The pieces are arranged in a graded manner so as to ensure a smooth progress to the next level. At the end of each lesson sufficient exercises have been provided to measure and reinforce language skills. The practice tests are designed to encourage students' participation. After completion of each exercise the learner will feel a sense of achievement which will motivate the young learners to go for the next. 

The targeted age group falls in that learners is begin to take shape. "BLOSSOMS" aims to inculcate in learners, particularly the first-generation institutional learners, love for the richness and variety of English language literature. It is hoped that the new series of books would contribute a lot in making the young learners learning English language, a gateway to modern communication and trade. 

Taking the help of Paschim Banga Sarba Siksha Mission these books are being distributed free of cost among the learners. In materialising this project Hon'ble Education Minister Dr. Partha Chatterjee, Govt of West Bengal, the School Edn. Dept., Directorate of School Edn., Govt. of West Bengal and the Paschim Banga Sarba Siksha Mission-all have extended their valued help and their role has always been indisputably momentous in all respect. 

A group of eminent educationists, teachers and subject experts worked hard to develop the textbook. The book has been illustrated by the renowned artist. I thank them all for their notable work. All suggestions to improve the series are welcome. 

July, 2014 
77/2, Park Street, Kolkata 700 016 
Kalyanmoy Ganguly 
Administrator 
West Bengal Board of Secondary Education

--- PAGE 6 ---
Textbook Development Committee under Expert Committee
Members:
Prof. Aveek Majumder (Chairman, Expert Committee)
Anindya Sengupta
Keya Basu Jana
Kaushik Choudhury
Ratul Kumar Guha
Prof. Rathindranath De (Member Secretary, Expert Committee)
Prof. Anuradha Ghosh
Purnendu Chatterjee
Suman Sil
Papri Basu
Acknowledgement: Prof. Muktinath Chatterjee

--- PAGE 7 ---
FOREWORD
The Hon'ble Chief Minister of West Bengal Smt. Mamata Banerjee constituted an 'Expert Committee' to review the entire aspects of school level curriculum, syllabus and textbooks in 2011. The new curriculum, syllabus, and textbooks are developed according to the recommendations of the Committee. The new English textbooks for the upper-primary level fall under a newly named series, 'Blossoms'. 

We have tried to develop and formulate the textbooks in line with the vision of NCF 2005 and RTE Act, 2009. In this textbook we have shifted from the conventional approach to a child-centric, activity based approach to learning. The exercises for the learners have been designed accordingly. A special effort has been taken to develop the conversational skills in English for the learners. The theme for Blossoms: English textbook for class VII is 'human relationships'. A teachers' guideline is appended at the end of the book. 

The textbooks venture to link classroom experiences with nature and society. We hope to supply our learners with enough material to develop their language skills and sense of aesthetics. For the latter we had invited famous artists to illustrate the books. The texts represent a varied spectrum of experiences and achievements. They will, certainly, help the learners to build their vision and perspective to life. 

We thank the West Bengal Board of Secondary Education, School Education department, Govt of West Bengal and PBSSM for their active support. The West Bengal Board of Secondary Education has obliged us by giving their approval for this textbook. A chosen group of educationists, teachers and subject experts developed this book in a very short period of time. If the book can help learners to apply the language in real-life situations, we will consider our initiative successful. 

The Hon'ble Education Minister Dr. Partha Chatterjee has enriched us with his views and comments, We express our gratitude to him. We invite all people who love education to convey their views for the improvement of the book. Thank You.

July, 2014 
Bikash Bhavan, 5th Floor, Bidhannagar, Kolkata-700091 
AVeek Magum der 
Chairman 
Expert Committee 
School Education Department 
Govt. of West Bengal

--- PAGE 9 ---
CONTENTS
Lesson Name | Page Nos.
Revision Lesson | 1-5
1. Book of Nature | 6-17
2. The Riddle | 18-26
3. We are Seven | 27-31
4. The Beauty and the Beast | 32-42
5. Uncle Podger Hangs a Picture | 43-53
6. The Vagabond | 54-60
7. Mowgli's Brothers | 61-72
8. The Story of Proserpine | 73-86
9. J.C. Bose | 87-97
10. The Echoing Green | 98-103
11. The Axe | 104-113
12. My Diary | 114-126
13. Ghosts on the Verandah | 127-135
Teachers' Guidelines | 136-137
My Page | 138

--- PAGE 11 ---
Revision Lesson 
Let's do: 
Activity 1: Tick the correct answer from the given options: 
I [am/is] Nilofar. I [am/is ]a girl. I study in class VII. There [is/are] forty students in our class. Some [is/are] boys and others [am/are] girls. Sima, Shamim and Rohini [am/are] my friends. Rohini [is/are] the best student in our class. She [is/are] very fond of me.

Activity 2: Join the following sentences with 'and' or 'but'. One is done for you: 
(a) In India summer is hot. In India winter is cold. Answer: In India summer is hot but winter is cold 
(b) A mouse is a small animal. An elephant is a large animal. 
(c) I have a pen. I have a pencil.
(d) The sun rises in the east. The sun sets in the west. 
(e) My father is tall. He is lean. 
(f) Bees are small. Wasps are big. 
(g) In a cricket match we need a bat. We also need a ball. 

Activity 3: Odd one out. In each set there is a word that does not fit with rest of the words in the set. Identify and underline the word. One is done for you: 
(a) Teacher, student, chalk, tall, duster 
(b) Football, goal, beautiful, field, player 
(c) Books, nice, pen, paper, table 
(d) Red, apple, guava, banana, water melon 
(e) Rice, wheat, barley, cereals, golden 
(f) Spinach, cabbage, tasty, cauliflower, onions 

--- PAGE 12 ---
Activity 4: Fill in the blanks by choosing the correct form of verbs from the given alternatives: 
(a) My English textbook [have/has] one hundred and thirty eight pages.
(b) Our class [has/have] thirty students. 
(c) My school [have/has] a big playground. 
(d) We [has/have] a beautiful garden.
(e) All my friends [have/has] some interest in sports. 

Let's talk: 
Describe your friend, using suitable adjectives 
Describe your house to the class 
Tell your class what you see everyday while coming to school 

Let's do: 
Activity 5: Fill in the blanks with suitable articles and prepositions: 
Iswar Chandra Vidyasagar lived ... the nineteenth century India when very few people went ... school. He founded ... school ... Calcutta which was later known as Vidyasagar College. He wrote ... Bengali primer which is used even today. We are proud ... Vidyasagar for his great work ... the field ... education.

Activity 6: Underline the correct form of the verbs given in brackets: 
(a) The sun [rise/rises/rose] in the east.
(b) When do you [go/goes/went] to school? 
(c) Two and two [make/makes/made] four.
(d) The great scholar Bopedev [write/writes/wrote] 'Mugdha Bodh'. 
(e) Robert Bruce [fight/fights/fought] hard to regain his kingdom.

Activity 7: Write the opposite of the following words: 
good, fat, wise, dull, old, warm, kind, happy, tall 

--- PAGE 13 ---
Activity 8: Make new words by joining '-less' to the words in the given box and fill in the blanks. One is done for you: 
help, harm, rest, power, meaning, colour, home 
(a) Water is a colourless liquid.
(b) Rita was ... as she had fever. 
(c) People often become ... during a natural calamity. 
(d) A snake is ... if not disturbed.
(e) The king became ... after his brother betrayed him.
(f) A sentence is ... without a verb. 

Let's talk: 
Suppose, last Sunday, a visitor came to your house. Tell your friend what each of your family members was doing at that time.
Hints:- 
Your father [talking with friends] 
Your mother [cooking] 
Your brother/sister [studying] 
You [painting] 
Tell your friends what you did yesterday evening before going to sleep.

Let's do: 
Activity 9: Your friend has written this passage. But there are mistakes in every line. Underline the mistakes and correct them. One is done for you: 
The History of Chess 
Almost two thousand years ago a board-game was played at (in) India. It was call Chaturanga. It was very popular among kings, warriors and scholars. Chaturanga mean four limbs. It represent the four groups of the army: the warriors who fought on elephants, the cavalry, the charioteers and the infantry. From India the game went to the Persia where it was called Shatranj. Some of the words we now use in chess were use in Persia. The term, 'checkmate', was earlier call 'Shah Mat' or 'the king is dead'. From Persia, the game went to the Europe. The game was now been called chess.

--- PAGE 14 ---
Activity 10: What do we call the people who live in the following countries? One is done for you:
India - Indian
Iran -
Italy -
Russia -
Canada -
America -
China -
Nepal -
Japan -
Pakistan -
England -

Activity 11: Make sentences with the following adverbs: 
slowly, fast, now, often, sometimes 

Let's talk: 
Suppose your friend was absent at the annual sports meet. Tell your friend about your experience there using the adverbs given in Activity 11. 

Let's do: 
Activity 12: Write the past forms of the following words: 
put, meet, jump, sleep, cry, kneel 

Activity 13: Fill in the blanks by choosing the correct form of verbs from the given alternatives: 
(a) They (goes/are going/was going) to school.
(b) He (live/lives/have lived) within his means. 

--- PAGE 15 ---
(c) She and her friends (go/went/goes) to the picnic yesterday.
(d) Rahim and I (eat/ate/were eating) when the bell rang.
(e) The striker (score/is scoring/scored) a goal in the football match yesterday.

Activity 14: Classify the following nouns in the chart given below: 
cow, fleet, Vidyasagar, chalk, honesty, girl, dog, Robert Bruce, ring, friendship, table, herd, class, television, teacher, Rabindranath, truthfulness, bench, enmity, football
(Common noun, Proper Noun, Material Noun, Abstract Noun, Collective Noun)

Activity 15: Study the family tree of your friend Sabeena carefully. Then write a short paragraph about her family in about 50 words: 
Kazi Abdul + Nargis 
Kazi Nurul + Shakeela 
Irfan, Imran, Shabnam 

Activity 16: Write a short story in about 60 words using the following hints: 
Crow looking for water-thirsty-finds a pitcher-water at the bottom-finds pebbles-drops pebbles-water level rises-quenches thirst 

--- PAGE 16 ---
Lesson: 1 
The Book of Nature 
Jawaharlal Nehru 

Let's start: 
Pundit Jawaharlal Nehru was a great freedom fighter and the first Prime Minister of independent India. He was a very good writer as well. The Discovery of India, Glimpses of World History and Autobiography are some of his noted works. During the late 1920s he wrote a series of letters to his young daughter Indira to share his ideas, thoughts and knowledge with her. These letters were later compiled into a book titled Letters from a Father to his Daughter. The present text is an excerpt from the book. 

Let's share: 
Why do we write letters? Discuss with your partner. Have you ever received a letter from an elder? Ask your partner if he/she had written a letter to anyone before.

Let's read: 
Unit I 
When you and I are together you often ask me questions about many things and I try to answer them. Now that you are at Mussoorie and I am in Allahabad we cannot have these talks. I am therefore going to write to you from time to time short accounts of the story of our earth and the many countries, great and small, into which it is divided. You have read a little about English history and Indian history. But England is only a little island and India, though a big country, is only a small part of the earth's surface. If we want to know something about the story of this world of ours we must think of all the countries and all the peoples that have inhabited it, and not merely of one little country where we may have been born. I am afraid I can only tell you very little in these letters of mine. But that little, I hope, will interest you and make you think of the world as a whole, and of other peoples in it as our brothers and sisters. When you grow up you will read about the story of the earth and her peoples in fat books and you will find it more interesting than any other story or novel that you may have read. 

You know of course that our earth is very, very old-millions and millions of years old. And for a long long time there were no men or women living in it. Before the men came there were only animals, and before the animals there was a time when no kind of life existed on the earth. It is difficult to imagine this world of ours, which is so full today of all kinds of animals and men, to be without them. But scientists and those who have studied and thought a great deal about these matters tell us that there was a time when the earth was too hot for any living being to live on it. And if we read their books and study the rocks and the fossils (the remains of old animals) we can ourselves see that this must have been so.

Word Nest 
accounts: descriptions of events; inhabited: lived in a place 
million: ten hundred thousand 

--- PAGE 18 ---
Let's do: 
Activity 1: Underline the appropriate alternatives: 
(a) India is in fact a (big/small/huge) part of the earth's surface.
(b) Once upon a time the earth was too (cold/dark/hot) for any living being to survive.
(c) Fossils are (a type of wild animal/ one kind of hard rock/ the remains of old living beings).

Activity 2: Answer the following questions in complete sentences: 
(a) What must we do to know about the tale of this world?
(b) How old is our earth? 
(c) Who roamed the earth before the arrival of human beings?

Activity 3: Fill in the blanks with suitable words from the text. The first letters of the words are given: 
(a) As a subject, h... is quite interesting.
(b) We have good relations with our neighbouring c...
(c) Plants need air, water and sunlight to g...
(d) Can you i... how big the Universe is?
(e) You should s... regularly if you want to be a good student. 

Activity 4: Make meaningful sentences with the following words: 
(a) interest : 
(b) surface : 
(c) inhabited : 
(d) together : 
(e) scientist : 

--- PAGE 19 ---
Let's continue: 
Unit II 
You read history in books. But in old times when men did not exist surely no books could have been written. How then can we find out what happened then? We cannot merely sit down and imagine everything. This would be very interesting for we could imagine anything we wanted to and would thus make up the most beautiful fairy tales. But this need not be true as it would not be based on any facts that we had seen. But although we have no books written in those far-off days, fortunately we have some things which tell us a great deal as well almost as a book would. We have rocks and mountains and seas and stars and rivers and deserts and fossils of old animals. These and other like things are our books for the earth's early story. And the real way to understand this story is not merely to read about it in other people's books but to go to the great Book of Nature itself. 

You will I hope soon begin to learn how to read this story from the rocks and mountains. Imagine how fascinating it is! Every little stone that you see lying in the road or on the mountain side may be a little page in nature's book and may be able to tell you something if you only knew how to read it. To be able to read any language, Hindi or Urdu or English, you have to learn its alphabet. So also you must learn the alphabet of nature before you can read her story in her books of stone and rock. Even now perhaps you know a little how to read this. If you see a little round shiny pebble, does it not tell you something? How did it get round and smooth and shiny without any corners or rough edges? If you break a big rock into small bits, each bit is rough and has corners and rough edges. It is not at all like a round smooth pebble. How then did the pebble become so round and smooth and shiny? It will tell you its story if you have good eyes to see and ears to hear it. 

It tells you that once upon a time, it may be long ago, it was a bit of a rock, just like the bit you may break from a big rock or stone with plenty of edges and corners. Probably it rested on some mountain side. Then came the rain and washed it down to the little valley where it found a mountain stream which pushed it on and on till it reached a little river. And the little river took it to the big river. And all the while it rolled at the bottom of the river and its edges were worn away and its rough surface made smooth and shiny. So it became the pebble that you see. Somehow the river left it behind and you found it. If the river had carried it on, it would have become smaller and smaller till at last it became a grain of sand and joined its brothers at the seaside to make a beautiful beach where little children can play and make castles out of the sand. If a little pebble can tell you so much, how much more could we learn from all the rocks and mountains and the many other things we see around us?

Word Nest 
fascinating: very interesting; pebble: small piece of stone; castles: forts 

--- PAGE 20 ---
Let's do: 
Activity 5: Identify which of the following statements are True and which are False. Give a supporting statement for each of your answers. 
(a) Fairy tales are rich in imagination. ( ) 
(b) We have no means to know about the far-off days. ( ) 
(c) The alphabet of nature is like the Hindi or the English alphabet. ( ) 
(d) We can learn a lot about our world from the rivers and mountains. ( ) 

Activity 6: Complete the following sentences with information from the text: 
(a) No book could have been written in old times because...
(b) To be able to read any language one...
(c) A small pebble was definitely a part... 
(d) On the beaches at the seaside, little children...

Activity 7: Fill in the following chart with information from the text:
1. Fairy tales need not be true. -> Reason
2. A piece of rock looks different from a pebble. -> Reason
3. A bit of rock from some mountain side reaches a little valley. -> Reason
4. All pebbles do not become sand. -> Reason

--- PAGE 21 ---
Answer the following questions: 
Activity 8 
(a) Which are the things around us that tell us about the earth's early tale?
(b) Why does a pebble have a smooth surface? 
(c) How does a pebble become grains of sand?
(d) What does the author mean by "The Great Book of Nature?"

Activity 9: Rearrange the sentences in the correct order by writing the numbers in the brackets. One is done for you: 
(a) The rock is taken to a big river by the little river. ( ) 
(b) At last it is turned into grains of sand. () 
(c) It becomes a pebble. ( ) 
(d) A bit of rock is pushed by a mountain stream into a little river. (1) 
(e) The pebble becomes smaller because it is carried on and on by the river. () 
(f) The edges of the rock are worn away and its rough surface is made smooth. ( ) 

--- PAGE 22 ---
Activity 10: Match the words in Column A with their meanings in Column B. One is done for you:
1. fascinating -> (f) very interesting or charming
2. merely -> (d) only or just
3. fortunately -> (e) luckily
4. alphabet -> (a) the set of letters in a language
5. surface -> (b) top visible side
6. worn -> (c) became damaged by use

Activity 11: Replace the underlined words with suitable opposite words from the box. There are some extra words. 
hopeful, lost, add, left, ugly, late, sad, rough 
(a) The man became famous in the early years of his life.
(b) She is looking very happy. 
(c) The trunk of this huge tree has a smooth bark.
(d) Jatin found his pencil box on his way to school. 
(e) Smita learnt to subtract.

Let's talk: 
Form groups of three and discuss among yourselves the following topics: 
* the things you learn about nature by observing the plants and animals around you 
* the importance of school tours or excursions that you learn from "The Book of Nature" 

--- PAGE 23 ---
Let's learn: 
Note the following parts of sentences from the text: 
* our books for the earth's early story 
* read about it in other people's books 
* a little page in nature's book 
We find the use of apostrophe (') in the underlined words. This punctuation mark is used to show the omission of a letter or letters in a word (examples: e'er, o'er, hon'ble etc.) or form the plural of letters and figures (examples: Dot your i's and cut your t's, Add three 4's and five 2's). It also indicates possession of or connection with something (example: Bani's mother is a school teacher) or creates shortened or contracted forms (examples: don't, I've).

Let's do: 
Activity 12 (a): Read the paragraph below and put the apostrophe (') mark in the proper places: 
Rahims father is a well-known person. The honourable M.L.A. of the area is his relative. He has donated a good sum of money to the local library for buying new books. The library is located near the girls high school. Sabinas brother and Akrams sister often visit the library. They like to read childrens story books and Tagores poems. Their parents also go there to read newspapers after the days work.

Activity 12 (b): Rewrite the following passage using contracted forms of words wherever applicable: 
The teacher said, "We all know you are a good student. I cannot understand why you have done such a thing. You should not behave rudely with your classmates. Promise me, you will always remember what I have said." The student realised his mistake. He said, "Sir, I am sorry. I shall never behave like this."

--- PAGE 24 ---
Let's learn: 
Study the following sentences taken from the text: 
* You have to learn its alphabet.
* You can read her story in her books of stone and rock.
In the above sentences the words 'its' and 'her' come before nouns and function as adjectives. They indicate possession or relation with the nouns that follow. So its and her are Possessive Adjectives. 'My', 'our', 'their', 'your', 'his' are also Possessive Adjectives. 

Now read these sentences: 
* We want to know something about the story of this world of ours.
* I am afraid I can only tell you very little in these letters of mine.
* This book is mine and those pens are yours. 
* Many years ago, this garden was theirs.
In the above sentences the words ours, mine, yours and theirs do not have nouns after them. They come after preposition 'of' or a verb. But they also indicate possession of or connection with the nouns in the sentence. So they are Possessive Pronouns. 'His' and 'hers' are also Possessive Pronouns. 

Let's do: 
Activity 13(a) Fill in the chart correctly:
Pronouns | Possessive Adjectives | Possessive Pronouns
I | my | mine
we | our | ours
you | your | yours
he | his | his
she | her | hers
it | its | -
they | their | theirs

--- PAGE 25 ---
Activity 13 (b) Fill in the blanks with appropriate possessive pronouns and possessive adjectives: 
Yesterday I forgot to take back ... pen from Sunil. I gave him ... in the class because he didn't bring ... 
The little girl has torn ... clothes. "But why are ... clothes dirty?" asked the mother to the girl's elder brothers. "We have soiled ... clothes while playing outside", they said. 

Let's learn: 
Imagine that Nirmal is a boy living in Siliguri. His friend from Delhi, Kanan, has written him a letter. Here is the letter: 
32/4 M G Road, 
Eastern Extension, 
Delhi-110092.
30 June, 2012 

My dear Nirmal, 
I hope you all are fine. Let me share a happy news with you. My brother and I, along with our parents, are going on a tour of Rajasthan next month. It will be great if you join us along with your parents. Please write back to me as soon as possible so that my father can make necessary arrangements. 

Your loving friend, 
Kanan 

A letter from a friend is a Personal Letter. It has six main parts- 
(1) The writer's address 
(2) Date of writing 
(3) Greeting or Salutation 
(4) Body of the letter 
(5) Leave-taking or Subscription 
(6) Signature/name of the person writing the letter.

The name and address of the person to whom the letter is sent is shown in a box. It is generally written on the envelope. Now you can understand that the text of Lesson 1 (Unit I and Unit II) is the body of a letter written by Pundit Nehru to his daughter Indira. 

Unfortunately, Nirmal cannot say 'yes' to his friend in Delhi because his mother is scheduled to undergo a surgery the following month. So he writes: 

22/1, Hill Road, Siliguri. 

Dear Kanan, 
I got your letter yesterday. Thank you for your invitation to go on a tour of Rajasthan together. But my mother is very ill. She is going to have a heart surgery early next month. So we can't join you for the tour. Please don't mind. Wish you a happy and memorable visit to Rajasthan. 

I am Nirmal, my dear friend. 

Let's do: 
Activity 14 (a): Nirmal hasn't replied in the correct format. Rewrite the letter correctly for him. 
Activity 14 (b): Write a letter to your friend in about 75 words telling him/her about a short tour you had recently gone to. Mention the places you had visited, how you travelled, people who accompanied you, your sightseeing and your enjoyment of the tour.

--- PAGE 27 ---
Lesson: 2 
The Riddle 

Let's Start: 
Akbar was one of the greatest emperors of India. He belonged to the Mughal dynasty. He had in his court the "Nine Gems", his nine advisors. One of these gems was Birbal, known for his wit and wisdom.

Let's share : 
Can you name any other famous emperor of India? 
Why would a person be called a 'gem'?
Can you name any other 'gem' of Akbar's court other than Birbal?

--- PAGE 29 ---
Let's read: 
The king of Kings, Emperor Akbar, who ruled over India was a great lover of arts, sciences, literature and music. One day, on a fine morning, he was walking in his vast garden. His garden was lined with trees that produced the tastiest and juiciest fruits in the whole kingdom. There were flowers of all shapes and sizes in his garden. He had his most trusted and favourite minister Birbal with him. 

But the great Emperor Akbar did not have peace of mind, the quality without which no one, not even the king of kings, can appreciate beauty. Wise Birbal, noticing this, asked Akbar, 'O great and powerful King, what is troubling you? You do not seem to be your usual self, for my king never fails to enjoy the beauty of the greatest kingdom this earth has ever seen.' 

Akbar replied, 'Birbal, my dearest friend, you are right. There is indeed a riddle that has been troubling me. An idle thought, which came to me in passing, is now my cause of worry. I am troubled because I cannot find an answer to a simple question- what is the fastest thing on this planet?' 

Birbal said, 'Is that all, your Majesty? Call your courtiers together. Let us see if one of them can answer. If not, then I am certain I can tell you of the fastest thing on the planet.' 

At the King's court, many heard the question that was troubling Akbar. Most were puzzled. Some said, 'bullock carts', others said, 'horses'. But Birbal just smiled at them. After everyone had failed to satisfy Emperor Akbar, Birbal offered to answer his question. He said, 'Your Majesty, it is the human mind!' To prove it, he said, 'Let the people of our kingdom present a problem to me. I shall show you how fast I can solve it using the powers of my mind alone.' 

A man came forward from the audience. He claimed that his neighbour had sold him his well. Now, when he wanted to draw water from the well, his neighbour wanted to charge him money for it. After being summoned to the court, his neighbour argued that he had just sold him the well, not the water in it. Akbar listened to this argument carefully and asked Birbal to settle the dispute. Birbal smiled at the man and said, 'I think the solution is rather simple. It is your well now, your neighbour should be paying you rent for keeping water in your well. If he wants you to pay for his water, he must pay for using your well.' 

The neighbour realised that he was outwitted and withdrew his claim immediately. All around, people were amazed at the wisdom of Birbal and the speed of the human mind that has the ability to solve a problem instantly. Truly, there was nothing faster than it. 

Word Nest 
appreciate: to understand the worth of something; riddle: a verbal puzzle; courtiers: a person who is part of the court of a king or a queen; summoned : called for; outwitted: defeated by logic 

--- PAGE 31 ---
Let's do: 
Activity 1: Choose the correct answers from the given alternatives: 
(a) Emperor Akbar was walking 
(i) in his palace (ii) in the royal garden (iii) in the house of Birbal.
(b) Birbal was Akbar's 
(i) most trusted and faithful minister (ii) greedy and unfaithful minister (iii) rival 
(c) The emperor was 
(i) happy (ii) calm (iii) worried 
(d) The fastest thing on earth is 
(i) the human mind (ii) bullock cart (iii) horse 
(e) The neighbour was outwitted by 
(i) Akbar (ii) Birbal (iii) the neighbour's friend 

Activity 2: Identify which of the following statements are True and which are False. Give a supporting statement for each of your answers. 
(a) Emperor Akbar was very worried when he was roaming in his garden.
(b) There were no flowers and fruits in the garden of Akbar. 
(c) Birbal was indifferent to Akbar's troubles.
(d) Birbal succeeded in answering to Akbar's query. 
(e) The people of Akbar's court admired the wisdom of Birbal.

Activity 3: What kind of a text is this? It is a (i) play (ii) essay (iii) story.
Activity 4: Give another title to the story. Give reasons for your answer.
Activity 5: Complete the sentences meaningfully: 
(a) Akbar asked Birbal...
(b) Most people of the court of Akbar were puzzled...
(c) ... immediately.
(d) ... withdrew his claim...

Activity 6: Fill in the chart with information from the text:
1. Cause: Akbar was troubled -> Effect:
2. Cause: Emperor Akbar asked Birbal to solve a riddle -> Effect:
3. Cause: The neighbour wanted to charge money for drawing water from the well -> Effect:

Activity 7: Answer the following questions: 
(a) What were the things that the great Emperor Akbar loved?
(b) Why did Akbar not have peace of mind? 
(c) What was the problem presented by the man from the audience?
(d) How did Birbal solve the problem? 

Activity 8: Identify the words from the text which are the synonyms of the following words: 
(a) confused (b) demand (c) argument (d) surprised 

--- PAGE 33 ---
Let's learn: 
Look at the sentences from the text: 
* Emperor Akbar, who ruled over India was a great lover of arts, sciences, literature and music.
* My king never fails to enjoy the beauty of the greatest kingdom this earth has ever seen.
The word great in sentence 1 is an adjective. It is said to be in the positive degree. The word greatest in sentence 2 is also an adjective. It is said to be in the superlative degree. Superlative degree is formed by adding 'est' or 'most/least' to the positive adjective. 

Look at the sentence: 
* Emperor Akbar is greater than many other kings.
Here the word greater is in comparative degree. The comparative degree is formed by adding 'er' or 'more/lesser' to the adjective. 

Study the following chart:
Positive | Comparative | Superlative
clever | cleverer | cleverest
big | bigger | biggest
rare | rarer | rarest
happy | happier | happiest
beautiful | more beautiful | most beautiful
good | better | best

There are certain rules for forming adjectives of different degrees. We can form comparative by adding 'er' and superlative by adding 'est', such as strong-stronger-strongest. In some of the adjectives, however, the last letter is repeated while adding 'er' and 'est'. This usually happens in case of small words which has single consonant at the end with a single vowel in between. Such words are fat-fatter-fattest. Some words which end in 'e' add 'r' and 'st' as the 'e' is already present in the adjective itself. Such words are large-larger-largest. Some words which have more than two syllables form their comparatives by adding 'more' and 'most', such as wonderful-more wonderful-most wonderful. Some words that end in 'y' add 'er' and 'est', but the 'y' changes to 'i' and then 'er' and 'est' are added, such as funny-funnier-funniest. There are some adjectives which are irregular in their comparative and superlative forms. They do not follow any rules, such as bad-worse-worst. 

Let's do: 
Activity 9: Complete the following sentences with the proper degree of adjectives: 
(a) Shiela has the ... (long) hair in the class. 
(b) Mr.Ghosal is ... (busy) than Mr.Patnaik. 
(c) We should be ... (careful) in our speech.
(d) Shenawaz is as ... (thin) as Pralay. 
(e) The owl is considered as the ... (wise) of all. 
(f) His house is ... (far) away from my house than Sanjeev's.

Let's learn: 
Look at the following sentence: 
* What is troubling you?
In the above sentence, we find that the action is in progress. When we express a present, ongoing action, we use Present Continuous Tense. The form that is used for this tense is is/am/are+verb+ing. 

Look at the sentences from the text you have read: 
* On a fine morning, Emperor Akbar was walking in his vast garden.
* At the King's court, many heard the question that was troubling Akbar.
The words indicate actions that were continuing at a time in the past. Such words which denote an action that was happening in the past is known as Past Continuous Tense. The form that is used for this tense is was/were+verb+ing. 

Let's do: 
Activity 10: Fill in the blanks with either Present Continuous Tense or Past Continuous Tense: 
(a) It ... (rain) now.
(b) Dr.Manmohan Singh ... (visit) Kolkata today. 
(c) Hari ... (study) at 9pm yesterday.
(d) The boys ... (play) in the field now. 
(e) Rahim ... (talk) to his friend when his mother called him.

--- PAGE 35 ---
Let's learn: 
How do we write a dialogue? 
In case of dialogue writing, we usually write exactly those words that are actually spoken. Abbreviations can be used in dialogues. Contracted forms are also used. It should be in a conversational style. The form is like this: 

Sita : Hello! How are you? 
Reshma : I'm fine. How are you?
Sita : Meeting you after a long time! Where were you, by the way?
Reshma : I was held up with my exams. 
Sita : I see! And how was your exam?
Reshma : Well, not bad really! But now I'm getting a bit nervous about the result.
Sita : Oh, come on! I'm sure you'll do well. 
Reshma : Thanks, Sita. 
Sita : Bye then! Take care. 
Reshma : Bye. 

Let's do: 
Activity 11: Suppose your friend asks you to solve a riddle and you don't know the answer to it. Write a dialogue in about 75 words based on the conversation that you had with your friend.
Begin like this: 
Sunil : Hello Rohit! What's going on? 
You : Nothing serious. Just having a crack at this crossword. 
Sunil : Good to see that you like puzzles. Well, here's a riddle for you. 
You : What's the riddle?
Sunil : Well, ...

Activity 12: Try to write a story that you may have heard before using the following points (in about 80 words): 
A crow--finds meat---flies to a tree---a clever fox----sees---fox takes says to crow-sing crow sings---meat falls crow sad----flies away.
Begin like this: 
A crow was flying for a long time. He became very hungry.
Now complete the rest of the story taking cues from above.

Let's work together:: 
Enact a play 
Read the story again. Write dialogues for Akbar, Birbal and the neighbour.
* Play the roles of Akbar, Birbal and the neighbour. There should be a director who will guide the characters. Some of your friends will prompt. 

--- PAGE 37 ---
Lesson: 3 
We are Seven 
William Wordsworth 

Let's start: 
The poet: William Wordsworth [1770-1850] was one of the greatest poets of nature. He was a major poet of the Romantic period. His greatest poems are The Prelude, The Daffodils, Tintern Abbey, London 1802, Ode to Duty, Upon Westminster Abbey etc. He spent his life in the Lake District of England. The present text is an edited version of his poem We are Seven. 

Let's share: 
Do you have any brother or sister? How many cousins do you have? How old are they? Where do they live? 

Let's read: 
A simple child, 
That lightly draws its breath, 
And feels its life in every limb, 
What should it know of death?

I met a little cottage girl: 
She was eight years old, she said 
Her hair was thick with many a curl 
That clustered round her head.

She had a rustic, woodland air 
And she was wildly clad; 
Her eyes were fair, and very fair;
-Her beauty made me glad. 

"Sisters and brothers, little maid 
How many may you be?"
"How many? Seven in all," she said, 
And wondering looked at me. 

And where are they? I pray you tell." 
She answered, "Seven are we 
And two of us at Conway dwell 
And two are gone to sea.

Two of us in the churchyard lie, 
My sister and my brother;
And in the churchyard cottage I 
Dwell near them with my mother." 

"You say that two at Conway dwell, 
And two are gone to sea, 
Yet ye are seven! - I pray you tell, 
Sweet maid, how this may be?" 

Then did the little maid reply, 
"Seven boys and girls are we;
Two of us in the churchyard lie, 
Beneath the churchyard tree." 

"You run about, my little maid, 
Your limbs they are alive;
If two are in the churchyard laid, 
Then ye are only five." 

"Their graves are green, they may be seen," 
The little maid replied, 
"Twelve steps or more from my mother's door 
And they are side by side.

"How many are you then," said I, 
If they two are in heaven?" 
Quick was the little maid's reply, 
"O master! We are seven." 

"But they are dead; those two are dead!
Their spirits are in heaven!" 
'Twas throwing words away; for still 
The little maid would have her will, 
And say, "Nay, we are seven!" 

Word Nest 
clustered: grouped; rustic: rural; clad: dressed; maid: girl; Conway: a fort city in Wales; graves: tombs; dwell: live; spirits: souls; nay: no 

--- PAGE 40 ---
Let's do: 
Activity 1: Choose the correct answer from the given alternatives: 
(a) The little girl whom the poet met was- 
(i) seven (ii) eight (iii) nine years old. 
(b) The girl lost- 
(i) two brothers (ii) two sisters (iii) a brother and a sister. 
(c) The distance between her house and the burial ground was only- 
(i) twelve steps (ii) ten steps (iii) six steps. 

Activity 2: Identify which of the following statements are True and which are False. Give a supporting statement for each of your answers: 
(a) The little girl was good-looking. () 
(b) Five of her brothers and sisters were dead. () 
(c) The graves were covered with green grass.() 

Look at the first four lines: 
A simple child 
That lightly draws its breath 
And feels its life in every limb, 
What should it know of death?
Activity 3: Where is the similarity? The word breath rhymes with death. Find words from the poem that rhyme with the given words: 
curl: ; head: ; air: ; clad: ; be: ; tell: ; laid: ; heaven: 

Activity 4: Answer the following questions: 
(a) Pick out the expressions that describe the appearance of the girl.
(b) With whom did the girl live? 
(c) What does the girl say about her living brothers and sisters?
(d) Why does the girl say, "We are seven"? 

Activity 5: Make sentences with the following words: 
dwell, clustered, rustic, grave, maid 

Let's learn : 
Look at the coloured words: 
* The little maid would have her will.
* Her beauty made me glad. 
Note that the two words have the same pronunciation but their meanings are different. These words are called homonyms. Here are some more instances of homonyms from the poem: met-mate; hair-hare; wonder-wander; two-to; there-their. 

Let's do: 
Activity 6: Make sentences with the following pairs of homonyms: 
met-mate; hair-hare; wonder-wander; two-to; there-their. 

Let's work together: 
Collect a few words and their homonyms. Write down their meanings.

--- PAGE 42 ---
Lesson: 4 
The Beauty and the Beast 

Let's start: 
The Beauty and the Beast is a traditional fairy tale of France and is not authored by anyone specific. It was retold by several famous writers. Animation films have also been made on this story. 

Let's share: 
Are you scared of beasts? What will you do if you meet a beast? Have you read any fairy tale? If so, which one is it?

Unit I 
Let's read: 
Once upon a time a wealthy merchant lived in a big mansion with his three daughters. All of them were very beautiful. The youngest girl was Belle. She was known for her loveliness and for being pure at heart. Her sisters, in contrast, were wicked and selfish. 

But their fortune soon changed. The merchant lost all his wealth in a tempest on sea. So he and his daughters started to live in a small farmhouse in a village. They had to work hard for their living. Some years later, the merchant heard that one of his trading ships had returned to port. Somehow it had escaped the violent storm. Hence, the merchant decided to return to the city to discover whether it still contained anything of value. Before leaving, he asked his daughters: "Do you want me to bring any gift upon my return?" 

Both his elder daughters asked for jewels and fine dresses. But Belle said, "Father, promise me, you will bring me a rare rose that does not grow in this part of the country". 

Having agreed to her request, the merchant set off for the city. When he reached the city he found, to his dismay, that his ship's cargo had been seized to pay his debts. So he was left with no money to buy any present for his daughters. 

While returning, he lost his way in a forest. Seeking shelter, he came across a dazzling palace and entered it. Inside, he found tables laden with food and drink, which had apparently been left for him by the palace's unseen owner. The merchant accepted this gift, ate to his heart's content and spent the night at the palace. 

The next morning as the merchant was about to leave, he saw a rose garden and recalled that Belle had desired a rose. Upon picking the loveliest rose the merchant suddenly came face to face with a hideous Beast. He told the merchant, "Last night you were hungry and shelterless. I gave you food, shelter and comfort. And now you are taking away my most precious possession after accepting my hospitality! You must die for your conduct!" 

The merchant begged to be set free. He argued that he had only picked the rose as a gift for his youngest daughter, Belle. At last the Beast agreed. "Fine, you can take the rose for Belle, but you will have to return to the castle or else your daughter shall come to stay with me in this castle." 

The merchant was upset, but accepted this condition. The Beast sent him on his way, with jewels and fine clothes for his daughters, and stressed that Belle must come to the castle of her own accord. The merchant, upon arriving home, tried to hide the secret from Belle, but she pried it from him and willingly went to the Beast's castle. The Beast received her graciously and told her, "You are the mistress of the castle, and I am your servant." 

Word Nest 
mansion: palace; tempest: sea storm; laden: loaded; seeking: looking for; hideous: extremely ugly; hospitality: generous behaviour towards guests; conduct: behaviour; accord: free will; pried: managed to find out something that is kept secret; graciously: kindly.

Let's do: 
Choose the correct option: 
Activity 1: What is the text type? Is it-(a) an imaginary story (b) a true story (c) the life story of a famous person?

Underline the correct answer: 
Activity 2 
(a) Belle is the name of the- 
(i) youngest daughter (ii) middle daughter (iii) eldest daughter 
(b) Belle asked her father to bring- 
(i) jewels (ii) dresses (iii) a rose 
(c) The owner of the castle was a- 
(i) rich merchant (ii) beast (iii) king 

Activity 3: Identify which of the following statements are True and which are False. Give a supporting statement for each of your answers: 
(a) The merchant had three daughters.
(b) The merchant lost his way on his return journey.
(c) Belle did not go to the castle on her own will. 
(d) Belle became the mistress of the castle.

Answer the following questions: 
Activity 4 
(a) How did the fortune of the merchant change?
(b) What were the gifts that the three daughters asked for? 
(c) Why did the merchant go to the castle?
(d) What did the Beast demand from the merchant? 
(e) Why did Belle go to the castle of the Beast?

Let's talk: 
If you were Belle, what gift would you have wanted from your father? Discuss with your friends and tell the class. 
Do you think Belle did the right thing by going to the castle of the Beast? Tell the class about your views. 

Unit II 
Let's continue : 
The beast gave her lavish clothing and food and carried on lengthy conversations with her. Each night, the Beast asked Belle to marry him, only to be refused every time. After each refusal, Belle dreamt of a handsome prince who pleaded with her to explain why she kept on refusing the beast. She replied each time that she could not marry the Beast because she loved him only as a friend. But Belle could not make the connection between the handsome prince and the Beast. She was convinced that the Beast was holding the prince captive somewhere in the castle. She searched for him and discovered many enchanted rooms, but never the prince of her dreams. 

For several months, Belle lived a life of luxury at the Beast's palace, being waited on hand and foot by invisible servants, having no end of riches to amuse her and an endless supply of fine clothes to wear. Eventually she became homesick and begged the Beast to allow her to go to see her family. He said he would allow it, only if she would return exactly a week later. 

Belle agreed to this and set off for home with an enchanted mirror and ring. The mirror would allow her to see what was going on back at the Beast's castle, and the ring would allow her to return to the castle in an instant when turned three times around her finger. Her elder sisters were surprised to find her well fed and dressed in grand clothes. They grew jealous of her happy life at the castle. Upon hearing that she must return to the Beast on a certain day, they begged her to stay just for one more day. They even put onion in their eyes to make it appear as though they were weeping. They secretly hoped that the Beast would grow angry with Belle for breaking her promise and would eat her alive! Belle's heart was moved by her sisters' false show of love, and she agreed to stay. 

Belle began to feel guilty about breaking her promise to the Beast and used the mirror to see what he was doing back at the castle. She was horrified to discover that the Beast lay half-dead out of heartbreak. He lay near those very rose bushes her father had stolen the rose from. She immediately used the ring to return to the Beast. 

Upon returning, Belle found the Beast almost dead. She wept over him, saying that she loved him. As soon as her tears touched him, the Beast was transformed into a handsome prince! The Prince informed Belle that long ago a fairy turned him into a hideous beast after he refused to let her in from the rain, and that only by finding true love despite his ugliness, could the curse be broken. Then the prince and Belle got married and they lived happily ever after. 

Word Nest 
lavish: generous; handsome: goodlooking (man); enchanted: the state of being under a magic spell; eventually: at the end of a period of time 

Let's do: 
Activity 5: Fill in the table with information from the text:
1. Cause: The merchant moved over to a village farmhouse -> Effect:
2. Cause: The merchant promised to send Belle to the castle -> Effect:
3. Cause: Belle wept over the body of the beast -> Effect:

Activity 6: Answer the following sentences: 
(1) Why did the Beast decide to kill the merchant?
(2) How did the Beast look after Belle in his castle?
(3) Why did Belle fail to find the prince of her dreams in the castle?
(4) What were the two things Belle carried to her father's house? Why did she take them?
(5) How did a handsome prince become an ugly beast?

Activity 7: Rearrange the sentences in the correct order by writing the numbers in the brackets. One is done for you: 
(1) The ugly Beast became a handsome prince. ( ) 
(2) Belle declined to marry the Beast. ( ) 
(3) The merchant promised to bring a rose for Belle. (1) 
(4) Belle wept on the dying body of the Beast. ( ) 
(5) Belle went to the castle of the Beast. ( ) 
(6) Belle promised to return to the castle exactly a week later. ( ) 

Activity 8: The meanings of certain words are given here. Identify those words from the text: 
(i) imprisoned (ii) that which cannot be seen (iii) friendly and kind behaviour to guests (iv) completely changed 

Let's talk: 
Sit in groups. Discuss with your friends- 
If you were Belle, would you have gone back to the castle of the beast? Give reasons. 
Tell the class about one of your dreams.

Let's do: 
Activity 9: Odd one out. In each set there is a word that does not fit with the rest of the words in the set. Identify the word. One is done for you: 
(i) Mansion/palace/flat/huge house 
(ii) drizzle/storm/tempest/cyclone 
(iii) friend/foe/ally/compatriot 
(iv) refuse/accept/decline/deny 

Let's learn: 
Study the following sentences taken from the text: 
* He entered a dazzling palace.
* She discovered many enchanted rooms. 
In these two sentences the blue-coloured words are nouns. The red-coloured words describe the nouns that come after them. These are Participle Adjectives. They function like the adjectives and qualify the nouns that follow them. 

Let us look at some more examples of Participle Adjectives: 
* A rolling stone gathers no moss.
* A barking dog seldom bites. 
* She threw away the withered flowers. 
* You should help a wounded man.

Let's do: 
Activity 10: Form groups. Discuss among yourselves and identify the nouns that the participle adjectives in the above sentences of Activity 9 qualify.

Activity 11: Underline the participle adjectives in the following sentences: 
(1) Runa is a trained nurse.
(2) The police caught the absconding prisoner. 
(3) A rising sun looks bright. 
(4) Do not board a running bus.
(5) The sleeping girl is looking beautiful. 

Let's Learn 
Look at the following sentences: 
* Ravi said, "I am going."
* Ravi said that he was going. 
Thus we see that there are two ways of reporting the words of a speaker: 
(i) We may quote his actual words. This is called Direct Speech. 
(ii) We may report what he said without quoting his exact words. This is called Indirect or Reported Speech. 

Note that in Direct Speech, we use inverted commas to mark off the exact words of the speaker. In Indirect Speech this is not done. While changing Direct Speech into Indirect Speech the following points should be kept in mind: 
* Inverted commas have to be removed while rewriting the sentence.
* The conjunction that is used before the Indirect statement. 
* The pronoun I is changed to he.
* The verb am is changed to was. 

We also need to keep the following points in mind when changing Direct Speech into Indirect: 
* Simple present becomes simple past. Direct: She said, "I am tired." Indirect: She said that she was tired. 
* Present continuous becomes past continuous. Direct: He said, "My son is reading a book." Indirect: He said that his son was reading a book.
* Words expressing nearness in time or place are generally changed into words expressing distance. Thus: Now becomes then, here becomes there, thus becomes so, today becomes that day, etc. 
Direct: The child said, "I am studying now." Indirect: The child said that she was studying then. 
Direct: Rita said, "I live here." Indirect: Rita said that she lived there. 

Activity 12: Identify whether the following sentences are in Direct or Indirect Speech: 
i) He said, "I am busy."
ii) The master said that the clerk would not attend office that day.
iii) The student said that she had left her bag there.
iv) She said, "I am leaving for Delhi now" 

Activity 13 (a): You have just finished reading a beautiful story. Write a story in about 80 words with the help of the points given below. Give a title to your story: 
merchant-going home through forest-has bag full of money-rain falls-gets wet- curses the rain- a robber comes-points gun at the merchant-shoots- unhurt- wet gunpowder-merchant thanks God for rain.

Activity 13 (b): Describe in a short paragraph (within 80 words) about your experience of visiting a garden of flowers. You may use the following clues: 
* its location 
* objects seen there 
* types of flowers 
* its effect on you 
* the beautiful memory that will always linger in your mind 

Let's work together: 
Making a Bookmark 
* Take a sheet of chart paper.
* Draw a cartoon of any beast. 
* Take a pair of scissors and cut out the cartoon.
* Your bookmark is now ready. Show it to the class. 
* Now discuss in groups the utility of using a bookmark.

--- PAGE 43 ---
Lesson: 5 
Uncle Podger Hangs a Picture 
Jerome Klapka Jerome 

Let's start: 
Jerome Klapka Jerome (1859-1927) is a comic writer and humorist. He is best known for his comic travelogues like Three Men in a Boat and Three Men in a Bummel. The present story is abridged from a chapter in Three Men in a Boat.

Let's share : 
Have you ever seen a picture hanging on a wall? Where have you seen it?
What are the things you need to hang a picture on the wall?

Let's read: 
Unit I 
You never saw such a commotion up and down a house in all your life, as when my Uncle Podger undertook to do a job. A picture would have come home from the frame-makers, and be standing in the dining-room, waiting to be put up. Aunt Podger would ask what was to be done with it, and Uncle Podger would say: 
"Oh, you leave that to me. Don't you, any of you, worry yourselves about that. I'll do all that."

And then he would take off his coat, and begin. He would send the girl out for sixpen'orth of nails, and then one of the boys after her to tell her what size to get. 
"Now you go and get me my hammer, Will," he would shout, "and you bring me the rule, Tom. I shall want the step-ladder, and I had better have a kitchen-chair, too. And don't you go, Maria, because I shall want somebody to hold me the light. When the girl comes back she must go out again for a bit of picture cord. Tom!- Where's Tom?-Tom, you come here; I shall want you to hand me up the picture."

And then he would lift up the picture, and drop it, and it would come out of the frame. He would try to save the glass and cut himself. Then he would spring round the room, looking for his handkerchief. He could not find his handkerchief, because it was in the pocket of the coat he had taken off, and he did not know where he had put the coat. All the house had to leave off looking for his tools, and start looking for his coat; while he would dance round and hinder them. 

"Doesn't anybody in the whole house know where my coat is? I never came across such a set in all my life - upon my life I didn't. Six of you! - and you can't find a coat that I put down not five minutes ago! Well, of all the--" 
Then he'd get up and find that he had been sitting on it, and would call out: 
"Oh, you can give it up! I've found it myself now."

When half an hour had been spent in tying up his finger, and a new glass had been got, he would have another go. Two people would have to hold the chair, and a third would help him up on it, and hold him there. A fourth would hand him a nail, and a fifth would pass him up the hammer, and he would take hold of the nail, and drop it. 

"There!" he would say in an injured tone, "now the nail's gone."
And we would all have to go down on our knees and grovel for it. The nail would be found at last, but by that time he would have lost the hammer. 

"Where's the hammer? What did I do with the hammer? Great heavens! Seven of you, gaping round there, and you don't know what I did with the hammer!"

Word Nest 
commotion: trouble; sixpen'orth: having the value of sixpenny; cord: string; injured: upset; grovel: crawl; gaping: looking with the mouth open 

Let's do: 
Activity 1: Choose the correct answers from the given alternatives: 
(a) The thing which would have come home from the frame-makers is 
(i) a picture (ii) a carving on wood (iii) a picture drawn on a piece of cloth 
(b) Uncle Podger would take off his 
(i) vest (ii) tie (iii) coat 
(c) Uncle Podger would ask 
(i) the boy (ii) the girl (iii) the charwoman, for sixpen'orth of nails.
(d) Uncle Podger, at first, would drop the 
(i) picture (ii) hammer (iii) nail 

Activity 2: Identify which of the following statements are True and which are False. Give a supporting statement for each of your answers. 
(a) There was a commotion in the house when Uncle Podger undertook a job.
(b) Uncle Podger did not want to hang the picture.
(c) Uncle Podger would cut himself and spring round the room searching for his handkerchief.
(d) The second thing that Uncle Podger would lose would be the hammer.

Activity 3: Complete the following sentences with information from the text: 
(a) Aunt Podger would ask... came to the house.
(b) Tom was asked to bring...
(c) ...after the picture ...as he would be sitting on it.

Activity 4: Answer the following questions: 
(a) Name the children of Uncle Podger.
(b) What did Uncle Podger ask the children to bring for him? 
(c) How did Uncle Podger cut himself?
(d) Why did Uncle Podger want his coat? 
(e) Where did he find his coat?

Let's talk : 
Suppose you are one of the children. Discuss what you would do for your father if he decides to undertake a job of this sort.

Unit II 
Let's continue : 
We would find the hammer for him, and then he would have lost sight of the mark he had made on the wall, where the nail was to go in. Each of us had to get up on the chair beside him, and see if we could find it. We would each discover it in a different place, and he would call us all fools. 

Trying to reach a point three inches beyond what was possible for him to reach, the string would slip, and down he would slide on to the piano. At last, Uncle Podger would get the spot fixed, and put the point of the nail on it with his left hand, and take the hammer in his right hand. And with the first blow, he would smash his thumb, and drop the hammer, with a yell, on somebody's toes. 

Aunt Maria would mildly observe that, next time Uncle Podger was going to hammer a nail into the wall, she hoped he'd let her know in time. She could then make arrangements to go and spend a week with her mother while it was being done. 

"Oh! You woman, you make such a fuss over everything." Uncle Podger would reply picking himself up. "Why, I like doing a little job of this sort." 

And then he would have another try. At the second blow, the nail would go clean through the plaster, and half the hammer after it. Then we would find the rule and the string again, and a new hole was made. About midnight, the picture would be up - very crooked and insecure. 

"There you are," he would say, stepping heavily off the chair on to the charwoman's corns, and surveying the mess he had made with evident pride. "Why, some people would have had a man in to do a little thing like that!" 

Word Nest 
smash: crash; yell: shout; fuss: create trouble; crooked: not straight; insecure: uncertain; charwoman: a woman who arranges the coal in a house; mess: dirty state of things 

Let's do: 
Activity 5: Choose the correct answers from the given alternatives: 
(a) Uncle Podger would call us all 
(i) intelligent (ii) careless (iii) fools 
(b) Uncle Podger would slide and fall 
(i) on the char-woman's toes (ii) on the piano (iii) on the chair 
(c) Uncle Podger's work would finish 
(i) at around midnight (ii) at mid-day (iii) in the evening 

Activity 6: Complete the sentences with information from the text: 
(a) Uncle Podger would lose sight of the mark...
(b) ...trying to reach a point three inches beyond...
(c) ...doing a job of this sort.

Activity 7: Complete the following table with information from the text:
(a) Cause: ... -> Effect: Each child had to get up beside him on the chair
(b) Cause: ... -> Effect: Uncle Podger would fall on to the piano
(c) Cause: At the first blow of the hammer -> Effect: ...
(d) Cause: ... -> Effect: a new hole was made

Activity 8: Answer the following questions: 
(a) Give two instances to show the carelessness of Uncle Podger.
(b) What did Aunt Podger say after Uncle Podger smashed his thumb?
(c) How did Uncle Podge react after finishing the task?
(d) Why was everyone tired after Uncle Podger put up the picture on the wall?

Activity 9: Match the following words in column A with their meanings in column B:
(a) sneer -> mock
(b) evident -> clear
(c) wretched -> poor
(d) surveying -> closely observing

Activity 10: Find the antonymns of the following words from the text: 
(a) rapidly 
(b) lost 
(c) remembered 
(d) roughly 
(e) save 
(f) straight 

Activity 11: Use the prefixes or suffixes (in-/im-/-al/-some) to form new words: 
(a) different: 
(b) possible : 
(c) sufficient : 
(d) arrive : 
(e) whole : 

Let's learn: 
Look at these sentences: 
* A picture would have come from the frame-maker's and be standing in the dining-room, waiting to be put up.
* I shall want the step-ladder, and I had better have a kitchen-chair, too.
The words dining-room, frame-maker's, step-ladder and kitchen-chair are formed by two or more words but they mean only one object. These words are called compound words. The meaning of the individual words add meaning to the compound word but itself individually they do not mean the same. For example: dining-room. This specifies a room used for dining but only 'dining' or 'room' will not carry the proper sense of the word. So also is frame-maker's. 'Frame' and 'maker's' have different individual meanings but together they mean a person who makes frames. Thus we find that these compound words have a specific meaning different from the individual component words. While the component words of the compound words are nouns, we call the compound words nominal compounds. For example kitchen-chair, step-ladder. 

Let's do: 
Activity 12: Try to find as many compound words you can from the lesson, and make sentences with them.

Let's learn : 
Look at these sentences: 
* I shall want the step-ladder.
* I shall want somebody to hold me the light. 
In these sentences, the action of the verb indicates an action that has not yet happened. The words 'shall want' indicate an action that will happen later. Such action that focuses on something that is going to happen is termed as 'Future Tense' of the verb. 
The structure of the 'Future Tense' is this- 
I/We+shall/will+verb 
You+will+verb 
They/He/She/It+will+verb 
Only in the case of the first person we use 'shall/will', but for all other persons we use 'will'.

Let's do: 
Activity 13: Write 5 sentences about what you want to be in future. Let's start in this way: I would like to be...

Activity 14: We have already learnt Plural Nouns. Find some of these from the following sentences and then make other sentences with them: 
(a) He wore his old trousers to school.
(b) Mother wanted the scissors to cut the thread. 
(c) The press went public over the issue.
(d) At the station, the goods were unloaded from the train.
(e) His true colours came to the forefront at the meeting.

Let's talk: 
Discuss with your friends what Aunt Podger would really do if Uncle Podger announced again that he would do a little job of this sort.

Let's learn: 
Find out how to write the summary of a passage:- 
Given text: 
When half an hour had been spent in tying up his finger, and a new glass had been got, he would have another go. Two people would have to hold the chair, and a third would help him up on it, and hold him there. A fourth would hand him a nail, and a fifth would pass him up the hammer, and he would take hold of the nail, and drop it. (72 words) 

Summary: 
After dressing his finger and getting a new glass, he would retry. People would hold his chair, help him climb, hold him there, hand him a nail and a hammer. Holding the nail, he would drop it. (37 words) 

While writing a summary: 
* do not use direct speech 
* do not quote from the passage 
* do not use examples given in the passage 
* pick out the main ideas from the passage 
* write about the ideas in your own words
* A summary should have approximately half the word count of the given passage.
Therefore we see here that only the essential ideas or incidents have been incorporated in the summary. No unnecessary details are needed. 

Let's do: 
Activity 15: Now write a summary of the given passage: 
Then he would spring round the room, looking for his handkerchief. He could not find his handkerchief, because it was in the pocket of the coat he had taken off, and he did not know where he had put the coat. All the house had to leave off looking for his tools, and start looking for his coat; while he would dance round and hinder them. 

Activity 16: Narrate a funny incident that you have experienced. You may use the following points: 
Brief account of the incident - when it happened - the funniest part of the incident - funny characters involved, if any.

Let's work together : 
Let's make a chart with funny characters whom we know from our daily lives or from cinema, television and books. You may write a few lines about these funny people. For example, you may consider characters like: 
* Laurel and Hardy 
* Charlie Chaplin 
* Mr. Bean 
* Tenida 
* Ghanada 

--- PAGE 54 ---
Lesson: 6 
The Vagabond 
Robert Louis Stevenson 

Let's start: 
Robert Louis Balfour Stevenson (1850-1894) was a Scottish poet, novelist, essayist, and a travel writer. His famous works include Treasure Island, Kidnapped, and The Strange Case of Dr Jekyll and Mr Hyde.

Let's share : 
Have you ever travelled far? 
* Name some places that you have visited.
* What are the other places you would like to visit?

Let's read: 
Give to me the life I love, 
Let the lave go by me, 
Give the jolly heaven above 
And the byway nigh me.

Bed in the bush with stars to see, 
Bread I dip in the river - 
There's the life for a man like me, 
There's the life for ever.

Let the blow fall soon or late, 
Let what will be o'er me;
Give the face of earth around 
And the road before me.

Wealth I seek not, hope nor love, 
Nor a friend to know me;
All I seek, the heaven above 
And the road below me.

Or let autumn fall on me 
Where afield I linger, 
Silencing the bird on tree, 
Biting the blue finger.

White as meal the frosty field - 
Warm the fireside haven 
Not to autumn will I yield, 
Not to winter even!

Let the blow fall soon or late, 
Let what will be o'er me;
Give the face of earth around, 
And the road before me.

Wealth I ask not, hope nor love, 
Nor a friend to know me;
All I ask, the heaven above 
And the road below me. 
- Robert Louis Stevenson 

Word Nest 
lave: stream; jolly: happy; nigh: near; afield: in the field; linger: spend a while; meal: grains of cereal after a coarse grinding; haven: a safe place; yield: surrender; blow: troubles and challenges 

Let's do: 
Activity 1: Choose the correct answer from the given alternatives: 
(a) The vagabond wishes to have his bed 
(i) in a frosty field (ii) in the bush (iii) at a roadside inn.
(b) The vagabond prays for a life 
(i) in close contact with nature (ii) devoted to social work (iii) spent in comfort and luxury 
(c) The vagabond does not seek 
(i) the heaven above him (ii) wealth (iii) the road below him 

Activity 2: Identify which of the following statements are True and which are False. Give a supporting statement for each of your answers: 
(a) The vagabond wants the way to be far away from him. () 
(b) The vagabond dips the bread in the river water. () 
(c) When autumn comes the birds are going to be happy with their chirpings. () 
(d) The vagabond will not fear to face Autumn or Winter. () 

Activity 3: Complete the sentences meaningfully: 
(a) The vagabond is a person who ...
(b) The vagabond wants a life of ...
(c) The vagabond asks for ...
(d) The vagabond does not ... to know him.

Answer the following questions: 
Activity 4 
(a) What kind of a life does the vagabond want?
(b) What are the things that do not interest the vagabond? 
(c) What would the vagabond do when winter falls?
(d) How does the poet describe a field in autumn?
(e) Why does the poet repeat the second stanza once again?
(f) What message does the poet want to give through the poem?

Activity 5: Match the words in Column A with their meanings in Column B:
A: love, heaven, nigh, lave, frosty, friend
B: a stream or a rivulet, that which is near, a feeling of care and understanding, a person who stands by at all times, covered with thin ice, a place where a soul finds peace and his God

Activity 6: Fill in the blanks with the antonyms of the words given in brackets: 
(a) There is a ... (warm) breeze blowing from the sea.
(b) His coat is ... (white) in colour. 
(c) After spring comes ... (winter).
(d) From the mountain top, I could see the river flowing ... (above).
(e) I do not want to be ... (early) for the meeting.

Activity 7: Make as many new words as you can from the poem by adding suffixes. One is done for you: 
(a) _y: wealthy, 
(b) _less: 
(c) _full: 
(d) _ly: 
(e) _th: 
(f) _side: 
(g) _er: 
(h) _r: 

Activity 8 (a): Find participle adjectives from the given sentences: 
(a) He got down from a running bus.
(b) The loaded truck hit the tree. 
(c) I met a charming woman today. 
(d) Don't eat rotten mangoes.
(e) Cricket is an exciting game. 

Activity 8 (b): Make new sentences with the participle adjectives that you have found in Activity 8 (a).

Punctuate the following passage: 
Activity 9: 
do you know Watson said Holmes as we sat together at the end of the garden in the darkness I have really some hesitation in taking you tonight there is a risk of danger You know I welcome it but you have evidently seen more in these rooms than was visible to me You saw the ventilator Yes but I do not think that it is such a very dangerous or unusual thing to have a small opening between two rooms it was so small that a rat could hardly pass through 

Activity 10: Complete the sentences with adjectives in their proper degree: 
(a) Ram is ... (old) than Shyam.
(b) Mt. Everest is the ... (high) peak in the world. 
(c) A mango is as ... (sweet) to taste as an apple. 
(d) Darjeeling is ... (cool) than Siliguri. 
(e) Kolkata is the ... (large) city in West Bengal.
(f) Sita is ... (tall) than Reshma.

Activity 11: Fill in the blanks with the plural nouns given in the help box. There are some extra words. 
species, headquarters, means, series, spectacles, tongs, congratulations 
(a) You have won the match ... ! 
(b) The police ... were not far away. 
(c) He did not have the ... but he had the capacity to build an empire.
(d) The test ... was so exciting that all were glued to the television. 
(e) He held the burning coal with the help of ...

Activity 12: Describe in a short paragraph (within 80 words) your experience of enjoying a picnic. You may use the following hints: 
* place of the picnic 
* time/season of the picnic 
* your companions in the picnic 
* games/events/activities 
* your feelings after the picnic 

Let's work together: 
Framing a Picture 
* On a sheet of chart paper draw a colourful picture of the vagabond in a natural background.
* Collect at least eight sticks, four of these equal in measure to the breadth of the picture and the other four equal to the length.
* Fix the sticks to the margins of the pictures on all four sides.
* Make a loop of strong string and fix it to the top stick carefully so that the picture stays upright.
* Your picture is ready for hanging on the wall. 

--- PAGE 61 ---
Lesson : 7 
Mowgli Among the Wolves 
Rudyard Kipling 

Let's start: 
The author, Rudyard Kipling, was a famous English short story writer, poet and novelist. He won the Nobel Prize for Literature in 1907. He is chiefly remembered for his stories for children. He was born in Bombay (now Mumbai) but grew up in England. His best known stories are Kim, Just So Stories, The Jungle Book etc. Mowgli Among the Wolves is abridged from a chapter of The Jungle Book.

Let's share : 
Have you ever heard stories related to a forest? Which animals are found in forests? Which animals are carnivorous? Which animals are herbivorous? 

Unit-I 
Let's read: 
It was seven o'clock of a very warm evening in the Seeonee hills. Father Wolf woke up from his day's rest. He scratched himself, yawned, and spread out his paws one after the other to get rid of the sleepy feeling in their tips. Mother Wolf lay with her big grey nose dropped across her four tumbling, squealing cubs. The moon shone into the mouth of the cave where they all lived. "Augrrh!" said Father Wolf. "It is time to hunt again." He was going to spring down hill when a little shadow with a bushy tail crossed the threshold and whined. 

"Good luck goes with you, O Chief of the wolves. And your noble children may never forget the hungry in this world."
It was the jackal, Tabaqui. The wolves of India despise Tabaqui because he runs about making mischief, and telling tales, and eating rags and pieces of leather from the village rubbish-heaps. But they are afraid of him too because Tabaqui, more than anyone else in the jungle is apt to go mad. And then he runs through the forest biting everything in his way. Even the tiger runs and hides when Tabaqui goes mad. 

"Enter, then, and look," said Father Wolf stiffly, "but there is no food here."
"For a wolf, no," said Tabaqui, "but for so mean a person as myself a dry bone is a good feast. Who are we to pick and choose?"
He scuttled to the back of the cave, where he found the bone of a buck with some meat on it. He sat cracking the end merrily. "All thanks for this good meal," he said, licking his lips. "How beautiful are the noble children! How large are their eyes! And so young too!"

Now, Tabaqui knew as well as anyone else that there is nothing so unlucky as to compliment children on their faces. It pleased him to see Mother and Father Wolf look uncomfortable. Tabaqui sat still, rejoicing in the mischief that he had made, and then he said spitefully: "Sher Khan, the Big One, has shifted his hunting grounds. He will hunt among these hills for the next moon, so he has told me."

Sher Khan was the tiger who lived near the Waingunga River, twenty miles away. "He has no right!" Father began angrily. "By the Law of the Jungle he has no right to change his quarters without due warning. He will frighten all game within ten miles, and I-I have to kill for two, these days."

"I go," said Tabaqui quickly. "You can hear Sher Khan below in the thickets."
Father Wolf listened, and below in the valley that ran down to the river he heard the dry, angry, snarly whine of a tiger. 
"The fool!" said Father Wolf. "To begin a night's work with that noise! Does he think that our bucks are like his fat Waingunga bullocks?"
"H'sh. It is neither bullock nor buck he hunts tonight," said Mother Wolf. "It is a man." 
"Man!" said Father Wolf, showing all his white teeth. "Faugh! Are there not enough beetles and frogs in the tanks that he must eat man and on our ground too?"

Word Nest 
squealing: speaking in a high voice; whined: complained in a crying voice; despise: to dislike and have no respect for somebody; apt: suitable; scuttled: ran with quick short steps; compliment: a remark that expresses praise or admiration of somebody; game: wild animal or bird that people hunt; thickets: a group of small trees growing closely together 

Let's do: 
Activity 1: Choose the correct answer from the given alternatives: 
(a) Father Wolf woke up at-(i) six o'clock (ii) seven o' clock (iii) eight o' clock.
(b) Tabaqui was the name of a-(i) jackal (ii) wolf (iii) tiger.
(c) On that night the tiger had hunted a-(i) man (ii) bullock (iii) buck.

Activity 2: Identify which of the following statements are True and which are False. Give a supporting statement for each of your answers. 
(a) Father Wolf woke up early in the morning.
(b) Indian wolves do not like jackals for their mischievous nature.
(c) Tabaqui did not find any food at the wolves' den.
(d) The wolf family was not at all pleased to hear the compliments.
(e) Sher Khan lived in the forest area twenty miles away from the wolves.

Activity 3: Answer the following questions by referring to the text: 
(a) How did Father Wolf come out of sleepiness?
(b) Why are the animals scared of the jackal? 
(c) What was the 'law of the jungle'?
(d) Why was Father Wolf angry on hearing the loud roar of the tiger? 

Let's talk: 
Sit in groups. Discuss with your friends and tell the class about- 
* Your favourite animal character 
* The general habits of a jackal 
* How are the wolves different in nature in comparison to jackals?

Let's learn: 
Do you know that at times we use a certain word to substitute a group of words? This process is called 'One word substitution'. 
Example: 
* a disease in which one is scared of water: Hydrophobia 
* an animal that lives on the flesh of other animals: Carnivorous 
* an animal that lives on plants: Herbivorous 
* one who eats no meat, fish or eggs: vegetarian 
* one who feeds on fruits: fruitarian 
* one who writes novels: novelist 
* one who writes poetry: poet 
* a lover of animals: zoophilist 

Let's work together: 
Get into groups. Discuss among yourselves and write at least 15 words that substitute certain groups of words. Write those words and the group of words that they substitute on a chart paper. Display the chart in the classroom. 

Unit II 
Let's continue: 
Father Wolf ran out a few paces and heard Sher Khan muttering and mumbling savagely as he tumbled about in the scrub. "The fool has had no more sense than to jump at a woodcutter's campfire, and he has burnt his feet," said Father Wolf with a grunt. 

"Something is coming uphill," said Mother Wolf, twitching one ear. The bushes rustled a little, and Father Wolf got ready to leap. Then, if you had been watching, you would have seen the most wonderful thing in the world. "Man!" he snapped. "A man's cub! Look!" 

Directly in front of him, holding on by a low branch, stood a brown baby who could just walk. He looked up into Father Wolf's face, and laughed. "Is that a man's cub?" said Mother Wolf. "I have never seen one. Bring it here." 

"I have heard now and again of such a thing, but never in our pack or in my time," said Father Wolf. "He is altogether without hair!" 

The moonlight was blocked out of the mouth of the cave, for Sher Khan's great square head and shoulders were thrust into the entrance. "What does Sher Khan need?" said Father Wolf. "A man's cub went this way. Its parents have run off," demanded Sher Khan. "The wolves are free people," said Father Wolf. "They take orders from the head of the pack, and not any from striped animal. The man's cub is ours."

The tiger's roar filled the cave with thunder. Mother Wolf shook herself clear off the cubs and sprang forward. Her eyes were like two green moons in the darkness, facing the blazing eyes of the tiger. Sher Khan might have faced Father Wolf, but he could not stand up against Mother Wolf. He knew that where she stood she had all the advantage of the ground, and would fight to death. So he backed out of the cave mouth, growling. 

"Sher Khan speaks this much truth," said Father Wolf. "The cub must be shown to the pack. Will you still keep him?" 
"Assuredly I will keep him," said Mother Wolf. "Lie still little frog. O you, Mowgli- for Mowgli, the Frog, I will call you. The time will come when you will hunt Sher Khan as he has hunted you." 

Akela, the great grey lone wolf, who led all the pack by strength and cunning, lay out at full length on his rock. "Who speaks for this cub?" said Akela. "Among the free people who speaks"? There was no answer. Mother Wolf got ready for what she knew would be her last fight if things came to fighting. Then the only other creature, who is allowed at the Pack Council, was Baloo the bear. He rose upon his head and grunted: "I speak for the man's cub. Let him run with the pack, and be entered with the others. I myself will teach him." 

"We need yet another," said Akela. "Baloo has spoken, and he is our teacher for the young cubs. Who speaks beside Baloo?" 
A black shadow dropped down into the circle. It was Bagheera, the Black Panther. Everyone knew Bagheera and nobody dared to cross his path, for he was as cunning as a jackal, as bold as the buffalo and as reckless as a wounded elephant. But he had a voice as soft as wild honey dripping from a tree. 

"To kill a little cub is shame. Besides, he may make better sport for you when he is grown. Baloo has spoken on his behalf," said Bagheera. 
"Men and their cubs are very wise. He may be a help in time," said Akela. 
"Truly, a help in time of need; for none can hope to lead the pack forever," said Bagheera. 
"Take him away," Akela said to Father Wolf, "and train him as befits one of the free people." 
And that is how Mowgli was entered into the Seeonee wolf pack. 

Word Nest 
muttering: to say something in a quiet voice that is difficult to hear; savagely: wildly; rustled: light dry sound of leaves; snapped: said something angrily; thrust: forced into; assuredly: with guarantee; reckless: rash 

Let's do: 
Activity 4: Which are the two animals that supported the wolf family to rear up Mowgli? Choose the correct option: 
(a) Sher Khan and Tabaqui (b) Baloo and Bagheera (c) Tabaqui and Akela 

Activity 5: Complete the following chart with information from the text:
1. Cause: The tiger jumped into the camp fire. -> Effect: ...
2. Cause: ... -> Effect: Moonlight was blocked at the mouth of the cave.
3. Cause: ... -> Effect: Mother Wolf would fight to the death.

Activity 6: Complete the followings sentences: 
(a) Father Wolf heard Sher Khan ...
(b) Sher Khan was unable to face the challenge of Mother Wolf because ...
(c) The voice of Bagheera was ...
(d) When the man-cub will grow up ...

Activity 7: Answer the following questions by referring to the text: 
(a) What was the 'most wonderful thing in the world'?
(b) Describe the 'brown baby' as he came to the wolves' den.
(c) Where were the parents of the 'man cub'? 
(d) Why did Sher Khan come to the den of the wolves?
(e) Who was Akela? Give a description of Akela. 
(f) Why do you think Akela wanted the 'man cub' to be in the wolf family?

Activity 8: The following statements summarize the story of Mowgli. But they are not in order. Rearrange the statements. Put the numbers in the given brackets. 
(a) Mowgli was included in the wolf family. () 
(b) Father Wolf was surprised to find a little boy in front of their den. () 
(c) Bagheera also supported the demand of the Father Wolf. () 
(d) Sher Khan came to the den to hunt the boy. () 
(e) Baloo gave his support to the wolf family. () 
(f) Father Wolf and Mother Wolf refused to part with the boy. () 

Let's talk: 
Suppose you are the writer of the story 'Mowgli Among the Wolves'. Tell your friends what other title you would have given to the story. Tell the class what should be the ending of the story.

Activity 9: Read units I and II and identify the words used in the text whose meanings are given below: 
(a) Baby of wolves (b) doorway (c) desire to hurt (d) speaking in a way that is difficult to hear 

Let's learn: 
Study the following sentence carefully: 
He was as cunning as a jackal, as bold as the buffalo and as reckless as a wounded elephant. But he had a voice as soft as wild honey dripping from a tree. 
In these sentences, the coloured words indicate comparisons. In English, we use adjectives not only for qualifying the noun, but also to compare one noun or pronoun with the other. In the above sentences, the qualities of Bagheera are compared with a jackal, a buffalo, a wounded elephant and honey dripping from a tree. 

Let us take some more examples of comparisons: 
* as cool as cucumber 
* as soft as wool 
* as red as rose 
* as white as snow 
* as hard as stone 
* as busy as a bee 
* as dry as a bone 
These comparisons are known as Similes.

Activity 10: Make sentences with the following similes: 
as white as snow; as red as rose; as brave as a lion; as big as an elephant; as free as a bird; as easy as A-B-C 

Let's learn: 
Study the following sentences taken from the text: 
* He has burnt his feet.
* Baloo has spoken on his behalf 
* Its parents have run off.
In each of the above sentences have or has is associated with the past participle of the verbs 'burn', 'speak' and 'run'. In English, such structures are called Present Perfect tense. In other words, present perfect tense can be formed with the following verb structure: Have/has + past participle form of the verb. Present Perfect tense indicates that the action has just been completed, but the effect of the action is still present. 

Let us take some more examples: 
* I have just completed my task. 
* Meena has just reached our house.
* Imran has taken all his books to the school. 
* My dog has eaten its food. 
* We have won the match.

Activity 11: Underline the Present Perfect tense in the following sentences: 
(a) They have worked till sunset.
(b) He has gone to sleep. 
(c) The actor has received the award.
(d) Sher Khan and Tabaqui have been unsuccessful. 
(e) Baloo has supported the wolves.

Activity 12: Make sentences with the following words using the Present Perfect tense of the verb forms: 
Finish, hear, lead, take, come, show, shine 

Let's learn: 
Now look at the verbs in these sentences. Do you find any difference with the Present Perfect forms?
* Tabaqui sat still, rejoicing in the mischief that he had made. 
* The actor had been to Kashmir.
* She had gone to work. 
* Ramu had not eaten for many days. 
* Sher Khan had jumped into camp fire.
In each of these sentences 'had' is used with the past participle form [or third form of the verb] of the following verbs:' be', 'go', 'eat' and 'jump'. The verb structures are in Past Perfect forms. Past Perfect tense is used when the action was completed a long time ago but the effect of the action remained for some time in the past.

Let's do: 
Activity 13: Make sentences with the Past Perfect tense of the following verbs: 
run, begin, call, watch, play, drop, burn 

Activity 14: Choose the correct option of the given verb forms: 
(a) The jackal found only a bone to eat as the wolves [eats/had eaten/have eaten] everything.
(b) Father Wolf [wake/ have woken/had woken] up at seven in the evening.
(c) Bagheera and Baloo [had supported/support/has supported] the demand of the Wolf family.
(d) I [have finished/finishes/finish] my task well before the scheduled time.
(e) Mary Kom [win/have won/had won] a Bronze medal in the London Olympics.

Activity 15: Fill in the blanks with the correct form of the verbs given in brackets: 
Mowgli's parents [run] away leaving the little baby. Sher Khan (come) to the cave of the wolves in search of Mowgli. The wolves [want] to rear up Mowgli. Bagheera and Baloo [support] the demand of the wolves. Finally, Akela agreed. 

Activity 16: Write a short story [in about 80 words] using the following points. Give a title to the story: 
A hare challenges a tortoise to a race-the race starts-hare takes rest on the way-falls asleep-the tortoise reaches the goal first. 

Activity 17: Suppose you have visited the zoo with your parents. Write a letter to your friend telling him/her about your experience in the zoo. You can use the following hints: Wild animals and birds you saw-their habits-your feelings-should they be kept in a zoo or in a reserve forest 

Let's work together : 
Choose dialogues from the story. Arrange them in order. Work in groups and turn the conversations into a short play. Now act out the short play in your class. 

--- PAGE 73 ---
Lesson: 8 
The Story of Proserpine 

Let's start: 
The story of Proserpine and Pluto is a mythological story that dates back to ancient Roman civilization. A similar story can be traced in ancient Greek mythology also. Handed down from generation to generation, myth is an imaginary narrative that tries to explain nature and its mysteries.

Let's share : 
(a) Can you name a mythological story that you have read or heard? Ask your friend also to name one such story. 
(b) Suppose you have access to a children's library. Which of the following would you like to read first and why?
(i) a fairy tale (ii) a detective story (iii) a story by a famous writer (iv) a mythological story (v) a story based on the life of a great person 
Discuss your choice with your friend.

Let's read: 
Unit I 
Long, long ago, in the beautiful island of Sicily, there lived a goddess called Ceres. She was the goddess of crops, plants and trees; so on her depended the health and happiness of all the people of this wide world. Ceres had a fair daughter, Proserpine, whom she loved more than her life. Proserpine was the brightest and loveliest of all girls. Her cheeks were rosy and beautiful like the apple blossoms in spring. Her eyes were as blue as the sky in April. Her long golden curls were as bright as the sunlight in springtime. All the radiant loveliness of springtime seemed to have taken the form of this fair maiden. Everybody said, "She is the Spring." Proserpine helped her mother in the fields. With her young companions she danced and sang, while gathering flowers. 

Far down the earth, there lived dark Pluto, king of the land of the dead. He had often asked some goddess to come and live with him, but no goddess was willing to live among the dead. So Pluto was very lonely. One day Pluto came to earth and was driving along in his swift chariot. Behind some bushes he heard voices and laughter. He was curious. He stopped his chariot, and walked to the bushes. There he saw Proserpine laughing and playing with her companions who formed a circle round her. 

Pluto was charmed at the sight of the lovely maiden. He looked at Proserpine and thought, "I must make her my queen. Her bright face will make even my dark kingdom look bright and beautiful." But he knew that it would be useless to ask the maiden to be his queen. So he stepped into the circle and carried her to his chariot. The companions of Proserpine were frightened and fled in all directions. Pluto departed with the captive maiden in his chariot. He drove very fast. He was afraid that Proserpine's mother Ceres would soon appear there in search of her daughter. 

After some time Pluto came to the bank of a river. The river was full to the brim and he could not drive through the water. To go in another direction would mean loss of time. So with his sceptre he struck the ground. The ground opened at once, and chariot, horses and all plunged into the darkness below. Just as the ground was closing over her, Proserpine seized her girdle and threw it far out into the river. She thought that the girdle might reach Ceres, and her mother would be able to trace her lost daughter. 

Word Nest 
Sicily: an island in the Mediterranean Sea, to the south of Italy; blossoms: flowers; radiant: shining; departed: left; captive: imprisoned or kept in bondag; brim: the top edge of a cup, glass, bowl etc; sceptre: an ornamental staff or baton indicating a King's power; plunged: jumped into or dived; seized: caught hold of; girdle: belt or waistband 

Let's do : 
Activity 1: Fill in the blanks with suitable words from the passage above: 
(a) Goddess ... lived in the beautiful island of ...
(b) ... was the king of the land of the ...
(c) Everyone said that ... was the ... herself.
(d) Pluto was ... when he saw ...
(e) Pluto struck the ground with his ... and it ... instantly.

Activity 2: Identify which of the following statements are True and which are False. Give a supporting statement for each of your answers. 
(a) Ceres had little role to play in the lives of the people on earth.
(b) Ceres was extremely fond of her fair daughter. 
(c) When Pluto first saw Proserpine, she was helping her mother in the field.
(d) Pluto thought Proserpine's beauty would brighten his dark kingdom.
(e) Proserpine threw away her girdle because she did not require it in Pluto's kingdom.

Activity 3: Fill up the following chart with information from the text:
1. Cause: Pluto led a lonely life. -> Effect: ...
2. Cause: Pluto heard voices and laughter behind some bushes -> Effect: ...
3. Cause: ... -> Effect: The companions of Proserpine got frightened and ran away.
4. Cause: ... -> Effect: Pluto drove his chariot very fast.
5. Cause: The river was full to the brim. -> Effect: ...

Activity 4: Some words or phrases are given below. Find words from the text having meanings similar to these: 
(a) a young unmarried girl: 
(b) a horse driven carriage or car: 
(c) eager to know: 
(d) flowers: 
(e) grasped or caught tightly: 
(f) a waistband: 

Activity 5: Fill in the blanks with suitable words from the list below. Change the form of the words where necessary. There are some extra words. (One is done for you): 
plunged, departed, trace, lovely, bank, drove, curls 
(a) The rose is said to be the loveliest of all flowers.
(b) Kolkata is situated on the ... of river Hooghly.
(c) I could not ... the advertisement in yesterday's newspaper. 
(d) When it rains, ... a car is not easy.
(e) Please note the time of his ... from office last Saturday. 

Let's continue : 
Unit II 
In the evening Ceres came back home. She did not find her daughter who usually came running to meet her. This had never happened before. Ceres was greatly surprised and a little worried. She searched for her in all the rooms, but they were all empty. Then she lighted a torch from the fires of a volcano and wandered about the fields and valleys looking for Proserpine. The search went on for the whole night, and in the morning her grief knew no bounds. 

That very day Ceres began a long journey. She wandered over land and sea, over hills and valleys for days together. She neglected all her work on earth. As a result the crops failed everywhere. The ground became dry and barren. Famine broke out all over the world. It seemed that the earth grieved with the grieving mother. The people were starving. They came to Ceres and implored her to bring back plenty, and save their lives. Ceres lifted her sad face, weary with ceaseless wandering, and said, "I cannot take care of the earth until I get back my lost daughter." 

So the people thought of praying to Jupiter who was the king of the gods. And to Jupiter they sent their prayer to bring Proserpine back to her mother. They were sadly in need of Ceres's help. Ceres wandered all over the earth and came at last to Sicily. One day when she was passing by a river, waves carried something to her feet. She picked up the object and saw that it was the girdle of her daughter. Ceres looked at it carefully again and again. Tears filled her eyes and streamed down her pale cheeks. She suddenly seemed to hear a voice coming from a nearby fountain. 

The voice grew clearer every moment and it said, "Ceres, great mother of the earth, I am the nymph of the fountain. I live in the dark depths of the earth. And I have seen your daughter on a throne in the kingdom of Pluto. Her cheeks were pale and her eyes were heavy with weeping. Go to Jupiter and pray to him to send her back to you. Do not grieve any more." 

With these words the nymph seemed to leap towards the sun and the sky. Ceres now came to see Jupiter and said, "I have found the place where my daughter is. Please give her back to me and I shall once more make the earth as fruitful and green as it was." 
Jupiter was deeply moved by the mother's sorrow, and also by the prayers of the people on the earth. He thought for a while and said, "Proserpine may return to earth if she has not tasted any food in Pluto's kingdom." 

Ceres quickly descended into the land of the dead. But alas! That very day Proserpine had eaten six pomegranate seeds, and for every one of those seeds she was destined each year to spend a month in the realm of the dead. So for six month every year Proserpine would come back to her mother. When she did so, flowers bloomed, birds sang and the earth smiled to welcome the young queen. But when the time came for Proserpine to rejoin Pluto in his dark underground kingdom, Ceres would begin to grieve for six months. The earth too, would look sad and gloomy. The trees would shed their leaves. The flowers, too, would hide underground, until they heard again the gentle footfall of Proserpine returning to earth. 

Word Nest 
neglected: omitted; starving: being without food for a long time; implored: begged; ceaseless: unending; nymph: mythological goddess of trees, rivers, mountains etc.; descended: went down; pomegranate: a type of fruit with many seeds; destined: fixed beforehand; realm: kingdom; gloomy: dark 

Let's do: 
Activity 6: Complete the following sentences with information from the text: 
(a) From the fires of a volcano ...
(b) People thought of praying to Jupiter because ...
(c) The nymph of the fountain lived ...
(d) Jupiter said that Proserpine might return to earth if ...
(e) Ceres would begin to grieve for six months when ...

Activity 7: Fill up the following chart with information from the text:
WHO | DID WHAT | WHEN
... | searched for Proserpine in all the rooms | ...
People | ... | they were starving
... | found the girdle of her daughter | ...
... | had eaten six pomegranate seeds | ...
The earth | ... | Proserpine would come back to her mother for six months.

Activity 8: Answer the following questions: 
(a) Why did Ceres feel very sad in the morning?
(b) Why was there a severe famine all over the world?
(c) Briefly narrate what the nymph of the fountain told Ceres.
(d) Why was Proserpine bound to live for six months in the underground kingdom?

Activity 9: Rearrange the following sentences and make a paragraph on how Proserpine returned from the underworld to her mother on earth: 
(a) Suddenly one day Ceres picked up Proserpine's girdle by the riverside.
(b) Ceres visited Jupiter and sought his help to get back her daughter.
(c) Pluto took away the beautiful maiden Proserpine to his underground kingdom.
(d) Ceres went underground to find that Proserpine had already eaten six pomegranate seeds there.
(e) Ceres, her mother, was much surprised not to find her at home in the evening.
(f) The nymph of the fountain told Ceres about her daughter's whereabouts.
(g) Jupiter said that Proserpine might return to earth if she had not eaten any food in the land of the dead.
(h) The mother searched for her daughter everywhere in vain.
(i) Proserpine was destined to spend six months every year in Pluto's underworld and the remaining six months on earth with her mother.

Activity 10: Match the words in Column A with their meanings in Column B:
(1) realm -> kingdom 
(2) ceaseless -> endless 
(3) pale -> dull or whitish in colour 
(4) grief -> deep sorrow
(5) implored -> begged
(6) gloomy -> dark or depressing 

Activity 11: Make sentences with the following pairs of words to show the difference in their meanings: 
a) meet: / meat: 
b) wandered: / wondered: 
c) whole: / hole: 
d) leap: / lip: 
e) cease: / seize: 
f) throne: / thrown: 
g) prey: / pray: 
h) tested: / tasted: 

Let's talk: 
Imagine yourselves to be the characters of the story. Pair up with your friend and start a conversation on any one of the following topics: 
* between the river nymph and Ceres, after she finds Proserpine's girdle 
* between Ceres and Jupiter, when Ceres meets the latter for help 
* between Ceres and Proserpine, when the girl returns to earth for six months 

Let's do: 
Activity 12: Solve the word puzzle by putting suitable letters in the blank boxes. You will find the words in the text.

Let's learn: 
Study the following sentences from the text: 
* I must make her my queen.
* Her bright face will make even my dark kingdom look bright and beautiful.
* She thought that the girdle might reach Ceres. 
* Her mother would be able to trace her lost daughter.
* Proserpine may return to earth. 
* He could not drive through the water.
In the above sentences the words must, will, might, would, may and could not are used to indicate emphasis, possibility, ability, permission, request, wish, probability, inability, impossibility, etc. These words are known as modals. It is important to note that several modals can be used to express the same mood or mode. Most of the modals do not express any sure fact. Modals are followed by the first form of a verb. 

Now study the following table carefully:
Functions | Modals
Expressing ability | can, could
Expressing possibility | can, could, may, might
Expressing duty or emphasis | should, must
Making a request | would, could, will
Asking for permission | may, shall, can, could
Giving suggestion | should, can, could

Now study the table showing the modals and their negative forms:
Modals | Negative forms of Modals
can | cannot/can't
could | could not/couldn't
may | may not
might | might not
will | will not / won't
would | would not / wouldn't
shall | shall not / shan't
should | should not / shouldn't
must | must not

Let's do: 
Activity 13 (a): Fill in the blanks with appropriate modals from the list given below. One modal may be used more than once. 
may, would, will, should, must, can, could 
(a) I ... finish my homework before going to school.
(b) He ... give you a solution. 
(c) Rajesh planned that he ... make a kitchen garden.
(d) He ... help me if he wished. 
(e) We ... save trees for a better future.
(f) The teachers expect that all the students ... pass the examination. 
(g) Students ... treat their teachers with respect.
(h) It ... rain today. 

Activity 13 (b): Fill in the blanks with the negative forms of appropriate modals: 
(a) I ... help you. I am sorry.
(b) Your bed is ready. ... you lie down now? 
(c) One ... go for swimming when the sea is rough.
(d) The student got poor marks because he ... solve a few sums.
(e) They ... be able to supply the materials on time.

Activity 14 (a): Now match the clues with the pictures. Write the matching picture numbers in the brackets. 
* God appeared in the disguise of a wise man and asked the cart-man to put his shoulders to the wheel. () 
* The cart moved. ( ) 
* A cart-man driving a cart. ( ) 
* He started praying to God. ( ) 
* The wheels sank in mud. ( ) 
* Cart-man pulled the wheel with great effort. ( ) 

Activity 14 (b): Write a story based on the above clues in about 75 words. Add a title to your story. 

Activity 15: In each group there are three sentences. One of them has some grammatical errors. Identify that sentence and underline it. One is done for you: 
Group A: 
(i) Ranit has taken my pen. 
(ii) This house is our. (underlined)
(iii) They live happily in their village. 

Group B: 
(i) I always enjoy reading children's books.
(ii) Sunita studies in Nivedita Girl's High School. 
(iii) The children is crying.

Group C: 
(i) The bird on the cage has flew away. 
(ii) Take out that book from the shelf.
(iii) The man arrived at the station on time. 

Group D: 
(i) She left the place quietly.
(ii) The cart-man is driving his cart in a slowly manner. 
(iii) Alam is known for his gentle manners.

Group E: 
(i) Would you like to have a cup of coffee?
(ii) If you wanted to perform well, you shall work hard. 
(iii) We can reach Delhi by road.

Activity 16: Write a paragraph on a recent Tree Plantation Drive undertaken by your school. Your paragraph should be in about 80 words. Give the following details: 
* Name and location of your school 
* Date, time and place of the Tree Plantation Programme 
* Inauguration Ceremony 
* The participants 
* Guests present, if any 
* Cultural programme to mark the day 
* Your role 

Let's work together: 
A. Mother Nature smiles when spring comes. She decorates herself with tender green leaves and colourful flowers. Make a scrapbook entry describing three common flowers that you see blooming in spring. Draw their pictures alongside the descriptions. Work in pairs. 
B. We celebrate the season of spring too. There are many festivals during spring. Find out how different sections of the society enjoy the festivals. In your scrapbook write about any two festivals of spring. Draw or paste pictures of such festivals alongside the write-ups. Work in groups. 

--- PAGE 87 ---
Lesson: 9 
J.C. Bose: A Beautiful Mind 

Let's start: 
A biography is the life story of someone, usually eminent. The person may be alive or dead. Biographies are always written by somebody other than the person himself. We read biographies of eminent persons so that we may learn about them and try to be like them.

Let's share: 
Can you name any eminent person of your district? Who is this person in the picture? Do you know anything about him? 

Unit I 
Let's read: 
Historically, in 1895, India was under the British rule. A different history was made that year at the Town Hall in Calcutta. An interesting demonstration was performed by Jagadish Chandra Bose, an Assistant Professor of Presidency College. Everyone was overawed when the electro-magnetic waves travelled from the Lecture Hall to a third room about 75 metres away. These waves passed through three solid walls. This was a remarkable and path-breaking incident which paved the way for future research all over the world. 

Born on 30th November 1858 at Bikrampur (now Munshiganj district of Bangladesh), Jagadish Chandra Bose was a man of diverse talents: a physicist, biologist, botanist as well as a writer of science-fiction. His father, Bhagwan Chandra Bose, was a leader of the Brahmo Samaj. He worked as a Deputy Magistrate in Faridpur, Burdwan and in other places. 

Jagadish Chandra's education started in a Vernacular school because his father believed that one must know one's mother tongue before learning any other language. Besides, one should know one's own people. Speaking at the Bikrampur Conference in 1915, Bose said: 
"At that time, sending children to English schools was a privileged status symbol. In the vernacular school, to which I was sent, the son of the Muslim attendant of my father sat on my right side, and the son of a fisherman sat on my left. They were my playmates. I listened spellbound to their stories of birds, animals and aquatic creatures. Perhaps these stories created in my mind a keen interest in investigating the workings of Nature. When I returned home from school accompanied by my school fellows, my mother welcomed and fed all of us without discrimination. It was because of my childhood friendship with them that I could never feel that there were 'creatures' who might be labelled 'low-caste'. I never realized that there existed a 'problem' common to the two communities, Hindus and Muslims."

In 1869, Bose joined Hare School and six years later he was admitted to St. Xavier's School in Calcutta. He passed the Entrance Examination and joined St. Xavier's College of Calcutta. It was here that he came in contact with Jesuit Father Eugene Lafont who played a significant role in developing his interest in natural science. Later, Bose went to England and secured admission in Christ College, Cambridge, to study Natural Science. 

In 1884, he received the Natural Science Tripos from the University of Cambridge and a B. Sc. degree from the University of London. The following year, Bose joined Presidency College as officiating Professor of Physics. But he was not provided facilities of research. He was also offered lower salary than his European colleagues. Bose had a remarkable sense of self-respect and national pride. Therefore, as a sign of protest, he continued his teaching assignment for three years without accepting his salary. Finally, the Director of Public Instruction and the Principal offered him a permanent teaching post. 

Word Nest 
demonstration: an activity that shows and explains how something works; overawed: impressed; paved: created a situation in which something can happen; diverse: of various kinds; spellbound: attention completely held by what the person is listening to and watching; discrimination: practice of treating somebody less fairly than others 

Let's do: 
Activity 1: Choose the correct answer from the given options: 
(a) Jagadish Chandra Bose studied in-(i) Hindu School (ii) Hare School (iii) Ballygunge Government School.
(b) Bose met Father Lafont at-(i) Cambridge (ii) London (iii) St. Xavier's College 
(c) Bose graduated in B.Sc. from -(i) University of Cambridge (ii) University of Oxford (iii) University of London 

Activity 2: Fill in the chart with information from the text:
Year | Event
1858 | J.C. Bose was born
1869 | Joined Hare School
... | Joined St. Xavier's College
1884 | Received Natural Science Tripos and B.Sc.
1885 | Joined Presidency College
1895 | Demonstration at Town Hall

Activity 3: Complete the following statements with information from the text: 
(a) Bose's father used to work as ...
(b) ... was the leader of the Brahmo Samaj 
(c) In his school days Bose's playmates were ...
(d) Bose went to England to ...

Answer the following questions: 
Activity 4 
(a) Why did Jagadish Chandra Bose receive his early education in a Vernacular school?
(b) What did Bose's mother do when he brought his friends home from school? 
(c) Who was Lafont? How did he influence Bose? 
(d) Why did Bose refuse to accept his salary?

Let's learn: 
Jagadish Chandra Bose was a man of diverse qualities: a physicist, biologist, botanist 
In Lesson 7 you have read about 'Single word for group of words'. Each of these words-'physicist', 'biologist', 'botanist' is a single word for a group of words. 
Now let us find out their expanded forms: 
Physicist: one who studies elements of physics 
Biologist: one who studies physical life or living matter 
Botanist: one who studies plant life 

Activity 5: Match the single words with their expanded forms:
astronomy -> study of stars and planets
library -> a place where books are kept
garage -> a place to keep cars
psychology -> study of human mind
orchard -> garden of many fruit trees
cashier -> a person who handles cash